Next, we're diving into near-drowning,
also called wet-drowning, and what it
means from a
respiratory therapist's perspective.
Near-drowning occurs when a patient
survives a submersion event but develops respiratory impairment.
The key problem isn't just water in the
lungs, it's
what that water does to the alveoli.
When water enters the airway, it washes
out surfactant and
damages the alveolar capillary membrane.
This leads to alveolar collapse, decreased
lung compliance,
and impaired gas exchange.
At the same time, fluid and inflammation
create a shunt-
like state where blood is perfusing areas
that are not being ventilated.
The result is hypoxemia that may not
respond easily to oxygen alone.
Clinically, patients may initially appear
stable,
but symptoms can worsen over time.
You might see coughing, tachypnea,
crackles,
or increasing work of breathing.
One of the most important concepts is
delayed deterioration.
A patient who looks okay right after
rescue can develop respiratory distress hours later
due to evolving lung injury.
From an RT standpoint, your priority is
assessing oxygenation and
ventilation early and often.
Monitor SpO2, respiratory effort, breath
sounds,
and mental status.
Watch for signs of fatigue or worsening
hypoxemia.
Management starts with oxygen therapy.
If hypoxemia persists, escalate to CPAP or
mechanical ventilation with
a lung protective strategy.
These patients behave similarly to early
ARDS, so think low
tidal volumes, adequate peep, and avoiding
further lung injury.
Another critical factor is temperature.
Many drowning patients are hypothermic,
which can complicate respiratory and
cardiac function.
Rewarming becomes part of the overall
management strategy.
Red flags include worsening hypoxemia,
increasing work of breathing,
altered mental status, and crackles that
suggest pulmonary edema.
These indicate progression toward acute
lung injury or ARDS and require rapid escalation.
For board prep, remember this flow.
Water aspiration leads to surfactant loss,
which leads to alveolar
collapse, decreased compliance, and shunt,
resulting in hypoxemia.
Management follows oxygenation support and
ARDS-style ventilation if needed.
Bottom line, near drowning is not just an
airway event,
it's an evolving lung injury.
As an RT, your role is early recognition,
continuous reassessment, and timely
escalation to prevent respiratory failure.